Richard leaves to start his studies. He is hopeful about a career as a surgeon, but continues to hope to inherit a fortune through the Jarndyce suit. Esther and Jarndyce find this troubling.

Esther and the others go to visit the Jellyby household, and see Caddy and Peepy. Peepy is in a disheveled state, as usual, but Caddy has endeavored to make her appearance somewhat better, and looks very pretty. She tells them good and bad news.

She is engaged to young Mr. Prince Turveydrop, the son of the dancing master Mr. Turveydrop. The old man is a "model of deportment" but makes his son do all the work in the dancing school. Also, Mr. Jellyby is on the brink of bankruptcy.

The party continues to Miss Flite, who is being attended professionally by Dr. Woodcourt. She has quite recovered, and talks merrily about her good fortune in being forwarded seven shillings a week from some mysterious source through Kenge and Carboy's. The source is not revealed, but Mr. Jarndyce, Esther notes, is staring intently at Miss Flite's birds (named allegorically: Hope, Faith, Jargon, Documents, Sheepskin, etc.) during this interlude, and Esther draws her own conclusions. Caddy Jellyby and Miss Flite have become friends, and Caddy helps Miss Flite to use her newfound money to best advantage.

Mr. Krook intrudes, and shares that he has been attempting to learn to read. Allan Woodcourt, who is also Mr. Krook's doctor, converses with the company, is invited to dinner, and becomes friends with Esther, Ada, and Richard.

In Chapter 15, Mr. Skimpole reveals that Mr. Neckett of Coavinses has died, leaving three destitute children. The party goes to visit them, and meets Charley (about 13), Tom (5 or 6) and Emma (18 months). The two younger children are locked in while Charley, whoses real name is Charlotte, goes out to work each day for some money. Charley is hardworking and tries hard to be a good mother to her younger siblings. The lodgers in the house (Mrs. Blinder, Mr. Gridley) help out with the children also, but their situation is desperate.

Mr. Gridley (the Man from Shropshire from Chapter 1) reveals that he is also embroiled in a Chancery suit which has ruined his life. He should have inherited money but the Chancery delay has consumed it. He and Jarndyce agree on the evils of Chancery.

In Chapter 16, Sir Leicester is afflicted with gout, and laying in sickbed at Chesney Wold. He considers it a privilege to have such an aristocratic disease, which all of his lineage have also had. He waits in the country looking at a picture of his lady.

Lady Dedlock, meanwhile, goes to their house in London and secretly leaves it dressed in servant's dress, veiled. Mr. Tulkinghorn sees her in passing, but does not recognize her. He finds, however, the ladylike bearing to be incongrous with the plain clothing.

Jo leaves Tom-all-Alone's, a street of vacant squatter's houses in a dingy street in London. He walks to his usual haunts near the court of Chancery.

Lady Dedlock seeks out and finds Jo the crossing-sweeper. Though he is abhorrent to her, she has him guide her to Krook's house where Nemo lodged. She is shown the tavern where the inquest took place, and then the charnel-house of bones behind an iron grate where Nemo's body was lain. She is horrified, gives Jo a gold coin, and disappears.