
Caddy Jellyby has spent the night in Esther and Ada's room, sleeping near Esther in a fit of despair. Before breakfast, she proposes a walk, and all the young people agree. Esther again shows kindness to Peepy, washing him and putting him to sleep in her bed. Esther, Ada, Caddy, and Richard take their first walk about London.

They soon meet Miss Flite again, who begs them to come to her lodgings. They go and visit Krook's rag-and-bottle shop, above which is Miss Flite's room. As they enter, Esther sees a legal handwritten advertisement for Mr. Nemo, requesting work as a law writer (copyist). Neither Esther nor we yet know it, but she is looking at the handwriting of her father and entering the house where he lives.

The group meets Mr. Krook, who is obsessed with Chancery documents. He rambles on about the Jarndyce suit, mentioning the names Barbary, Clare, and Dedlock, giving Esther, unaware, two more names of her mysterious parentage. They see Miss Flite's bare and sad room, and Richard surreptitiously leaves some money for her. They return to the Jellyby house, much affected by the sad states to which Chancery can reduce people.

In Chapter 6, the long awaited meeting with Mr. Jarndyce happens at his home, Bleak House. He is described as a handsome, robust man in his 50s -- exceedingly kindly, genteel, and self-effacing. He has a little quirk of mentioning the "east wind" whenever something he doesn't like is brought up. The three young people instantly like and feel affection for their mutual benefactor.

A "perfect child" is abruptly introduced -- the parasitic poet, Mr. Skimpole. The three young people are instantly brought into his inbroglios when the bailiff, a man called Neckett, arrives and demands payment of a debt. Richard and Esther come to the rescue, and, upon learning of it, Mr. Jarndyce warns them not to give money to Skimpole.

At the end of the day, Esther is given the keys to the household, the mark of the housekeeper of Bleak House. She is excited and honored to have this position. She sets up residence in a room adjoining Ada's, with a sitting room in between, and everything in the house is to the young people's liking.

Chapter 7 is back in Chesney Wold. Sir Leicester and Lady Dedlock have left for Paris. The rain continues, and Mrs. Rouncewell, the aged housekeeper, is introduced. She is instructing a young village girl of considerable beauty in the ways of housekeeping and maid's work in a great house. Mrs. Rouncewell's grandson, Watt, who loves Rosa, is visiting.

In the midst of the rain a couple of visitors come to see the house, but are told it "isn't the day". They persist, and are admitted, by using Mr. Tulkinghorn's name. Mr. Guppy and his friend are brought through the house, and Mr. Guppy admires a portrait of Lady Dedlock. He exclaims that he must have seen the subject somewhere before. Guppy, who had met Esther Summerson briefly in London at Kenge and Carboy's, is unconsciously remembering Lady Dedlock's resemblence to Esther. Guppy leaves a bit perplexed.

Mrs. Rouncewell had refused to tell the family ghost story, but now recounts it to her grandson and her charge, Rosa. The Ghost's Walk is a terraced walk outside the house, and an eerie footstep is often heard echoing from it. It is supposed that two hundred years ago, a previous Lady Dedlock had sabotaged horses meant for Cavaliers fighting Cromwellian forces. She had lamed them, and, upon being discovered, was lamed herself by her husband in a struggle. She was limping on the terrace and fell and died, and she vowed to haunt the terrace until "the pride of the house is tumbled." Watt and Rosa can still hear the phantom footsteps. 