The scene opens in London on a foggy, smoggy day. The High Court of Chancery is in session, and it appears that the fog has settled thickest on this part of London. This is where the legal suit of Jarndyce and Jarndyce is being argued. A little mad old woman (Miss Flite), and a man from Shropshire (Mr. Gridley) are in attendance. A "sallow prisoner" is brought forward. Mr. Tangle, a lawyer, speaks with the Lord High Chancellor, and the matter of the two young wards in Jarndyce is discussed. This matter will come up before the court tomorrow.

The scene changes in Chapter 2 to Chesney Wold, a stately home in Lincolnshire. Here the weather is also bad, but it is constant rain rather than fog. The lady of the manor, Lady Dedlock, is bored to death. She had been in London, and has come back to the country seat before leaving for Paris in a few days.

Lady Dedlock is introduced to us as a very beautiful middle-aged society lady, her charms undimmed by time. She is exceedingly dignified and self-controlled, but her "caprices," which she tries to hide, are known to her servants and tradesmen. She is the wife of Sir Leicester Dedlock, a baronet, who has married somehat beneath him. It is clear that Lady Dedlock has brought neither an aristocratic lineage or a fortune to the marriage. It is also clear that Sir Leicester has such a great amount of both of those things, and loves her so dearly, that it matters not to him.

Mr. Tulkinghorn, the family solicitor, has come down to Chesney Wold to discuss the Jarndyce case, in which Lady Dedlock has some slight interest. He is a secretive, enigmatic man, of the most controlled and logical character. He brings many legal papers with him, and Lady Dedlock seems to take an interest in the handwriting on one of them. She asks whose writing it is, but Mr. Tulkinghorn cannot answer her. She becomes faint and must be taken to her room.

In Chapter 3, Esther Summerson's life story is told. She has been materially provided for but emotionally neglected by her "godmother" in the town of Windsor. When Esther is about fourteen, her godmother dies, and Esther is sent to Greenleaf school. Through Mr. Kenge, John Jarndyce's solicitor, who comes to see Esther after her godmother's death, she learns her benefactor is Mr. Jarndyce. She has never seen him, but he appears, unbeknownst to her until years later, in the carriage that takes her to Greenleaf school. She is sent there after her godmother's death, and passes six happy years there, being taught by the Misses Donny. Her accounts are paid by her unknown benefactor all the while. When she is older she becomes a teacher of the other girls there, and inspires great affection in her students.

When she has grown old and educated enough to leave Greenleaf school, she is asked to serve in her benefactor's house, Bleak House. She is brought to Chancery Court to meet Ada Clare and Richard Carstone, two wards in the Jarndyce suit, who are also under the guardianship of Mr. Jarndyce. Esther is meant to be Ada's lady companion.

As they leave the court, they meet Miss Flite, who introduces herself. They learn she is also a suitor in Chancery, and observe that she is poor, eccentric, and perhaps a little mad.

In Chapter 4, the three young people are sent to stay the night at the Jellyby household. Mrs. Jellyby is a philanthropic lady who neglects her large and chaotic household in favor of writing long letters, dictated to her eldest daughter Caddy, about the social conditions in places in Africa. Caddy, an overworked waif, clings to Esther and becomes her friend, as does the youngest neglected child, Peepy. 